 S U C C E S S   C O D E S
 
  200 Command completed successfully
  This is the normal response for successful completion of most RRP
  commands.
 
  210 Domain name available
  This is the normal response for successful completion of an RRP CHECK
  command for a domain name that is not currently registered.
 
  211 Domain name not available
  This is the normal response for successful completion of an RRP CHECK
  command for a domain name that is currently registered.
 
  212 Nameserver name available
  This is the normal response for successful completion of an RRP CHECK
  command for a name server that is not currently registered.
 
  213 Nameserver name not available
  This is the normal response for successful completion of an RRP CHECK
  command for a name server that is currently registered.
 
  220 Command completed successfully. Server closing connection
  This is the normal response for successful completion of an RRP QUIT
  command.  It may also be returned by other RRP commands if a transient
  situation is noted that requires closing the connection after
  successfully completing the RRP command.
 

 F A I L U R E   C O D E S
 
  420 Command failed due to server error. Server closing connection
  A transient server error has caused RRP command failure and session
  termination. A new session must be established before continued
  processing can be attempted.
 
  421 Command failed due to server error. Client should try again
  A transient server error has caused RRP command failure. A subsequent
  retry may produce successful results.
 
  500 Invalid command name
  A client-specified RRP command name was not recognized as a valid RRP
  command name.
 
  501 Invalid command option
  A client-specified RRP command parameter was not recognized as a valid
  RRP command parameter.
 
  502 Invalid entity value
  The "value" of an entity name-value pair is invalid. Command blocks
  that require an "EntityName" parameter also require a value that
  specifies the entity name, and the provided value is invalid.
 
  503 Invalid attribute name
  A client-specified RRP command parameter was not recognized as a valid
  RRP command parameter.
 
  504 Missing required attribute
  A parameter required to execute the RRP command was not provided by
  the client. The command should be retried with all required parameters
  specified.
 
  505 Invalid attribute value syntax
  A supplied parameter value is syntactically incorrect. For example, a
  year value digit such as "5" may be required but the client provided a
  string of characters such as "five".
 
  506 Invalid option value
  A client-specified value for an RRP command parameter is out-of-bounds
  or otherwise not within acceptable System limits.
 
  507 Invalid command format
  The specified command does not resemble a well-formed RRP command. The
  command should be retried using the proper command structure and
  syntax.
 
  508 Missing required entity
  An entity required for command completion was not provided by the
  client. For example, the CHECK command requires specification of
  either a "Domain" entity or a "Nameserver" entity.
 
  509 Missing command option
  A command parameter that isn't really optional (such as the registrar
  ID in a SESSION command) was not provided by the client. The command
  should be retried with all needed parameters.
 
  520 Server closing connection. Client should try opening new connection; <why>
  A timeout event has been detected, and the client's session is being
  ended.  The System SHOULD define timeout periods to begin a client
  command, complete a client command, and for the duration of an open
  session. The reason for the timeout MUST be provided at the end of the
  response code string.
 
  521 Too many sessions open. Server closing connection
  A System-defined limit on the number of open connections has been
  exceeded, and it is impossible to establish a new session at the
  moment. It may be possible to establish a session by waiting for a few
  moments or by closing existing unused sessions.
 
  530 Authentication failed
  The client-supplied registrar identifier or password was not
  recognized by the System. A subsequent retry with valid values may
  produce successful results. Repeated authorization failures MAY result
  in termination of the TCP connection.
 
  531 Authorization failed
  Registrars may not view or alter data associated with either the
  registry or another registrar. This response code is typically
  returned when a registrar attempts to view or modify data belonging to
  either the registry or another registrar. A typical situation includes
  doing a STATUS command for a domain registered to another registrar.
 
  532 Domain names linked with name server
  The name server is hosting active domains. This error occurs when a
  registrar is trying to delete a server that is the name server for
  active domains.  The registry MUST not allow the registrar to delete
  this server. All of the domain names using this server MUST be
  modified to use a different name server before the name server can be
  deleted.
 
  533 Domain name has active name servers
  The domain name has active name servers. The registrar is trying to
  delete a domain name that is a parent domain of an active name server,
  i.e., a server that is hosting active domains. All of the name servers
  within the domain MUST be removed from service before the domain can
  be deleted.
 
  534 Domain name has not been flagged for transfer
  The registrar is trying to approve or reject a domain name transfer
  for a domain name that is not pending transfer.
 
  535 Restricted IP address
  IANA identifies certain IP address ranges that are not valid for
  normal use.  The registrar is trying to use an IP address that is in a
  restricted IP address range as identified by IANA.
 
  536 Domain already flagged for transfer
  The registrar tried to perform a transfer command for a domain name
  that is awaiting approval of an earlier transfer request.
 
  540 Attribute value is not unique
  A supplied attribute value is not unique. This occurs when the
  registrar is adding a domain name that already exists in the registry,
  a server that already exists in the registry, or an IP address that is
  already being used by another server in the registry. Another
  possibility occurs when performing domain modifications and the
  registrar is adding a server that is already in the list of servers
  for the domain name or setting a domain name to a status to which it
  is already set. The RRP STATUS command MAY be used to determine
  current domain name status before attempting to change the status.
  When modifying or adding a name server, the IP address of the name
  server might not be unique. The registry MUST not allow IP addresses
  to be used by more than one server.
 
  541 Invalid attribute value
  A supplied parameter value is invalid. Examples of invalid attribute
  values include an invalid IP address, an invalid domain name, an
  invalid server name, or an invalid renewal period.
 
  542 Invalid old value for an attribute
  A current attribute value to be modified is invalid. The registrar is
  trying to modify an attribute of a server or a domain name that does
  not exist in the registry.
 
  543 Final or implicit attribute cannot be updated
  The registrar is attempting to modify an attribute that is only
  modifiable by the registry. Registrars can not modify final or
  implicit attribute values.
 
  544 Entity on hold
  The attempted operation was rejected because the entity is on HOLD
  status. If the HOLD status was set by the registrar, the status can be
  changed using the MOD command and the requested command can be
  retried. If the HOLD status was set by the registry, the registrar
  must contact the registry to change the status before the command can
  be successful.
 
  545 Entity reference not found
  A required entity reference was not found. This occurs when the
  registrar tries to add a new name server and the parent domain of the
  name server does not exist in the registry. It also occurs when the
  user is trying to add a new name server to a domain name when the name
  server does not exist in the registry.
 
  546 Credit limit exceeded
  The registrar's credit limit has been exceeded. This is an
  implementation specific error that occurs when a potentially billable
  operation, such as adding a domain name, renewing a domain name, or
  transferring a domain name, is attempted and the registrar does not
  have sufficient financial standing with the registry to complete the
  operation.
 
  547 Invalid command sequence
  RRP commands are issued using a well-formed syntax that requires entry
  of command structures in particular sequences. This response code
  indicates that an ill-formed command was received and rejected.
 
  548 Domain is not up for renewal
  A RENEW command was attempted during a period in which the domain can
  not be renewed. Implementations MAY limit renewal periods to
  particular time frames, such as within 90 days of the domain's
  expiration. This response indicates that the RENEW command was
  received outside of the System-defined domain renewal period.
 
  549 Command failed
  A System error prevented successful completion of the requested RRP
  command.  Retrying the command might produce success, but a repeated
  failure indicates a System error condition.
 
  550 Parent domain not registered
  The parent domain of a name server being registered is not registered.
  This occurs when the registrar tries to add a new name server and the
  parent domain for the server does not exist in the registry.
 
  551 Parent domain status does not allow for operation
  The status of the parent domain does not allow the requested
  operation. This occurs when a registrar tries to modify a server whose
  parent domain is flagged as LOCK or HOLD in the registry.
 
  552 Domain status does not allow for operation
  The status of the domain does not allow the requested operation. This
  occurs when a registrar tries to modify or delete a domain that is
  flagged as LOCK or HOLD in the registry.
 

  553 Operation not allowed. Domain pending transfer
  The status of the domain does not allow the requested operation. The
  registrar is attempting to delete a domain that is pending approval or
  denial of a transfer request.
 
  554 Domain already registered
  A registrar tried to register a domain name that has already been
  registered by the same registrar.
 
  555 Domain already renewed
  A registrar tried to renew a domain using the same parameters as
  specified for an earlier, successful renewal. This will commonly occur
  when executing the same RENEW command more than once.
 
  556: Maximum registration period exceeded
  A registrar tried to renew a domain registration without specifying a
  renewal period (the System default was used), and the resulting new
  registration period exceeds the System-defined maximum registration
  period. If there is renewal time available with the System-defined
  maximum registration period it may be possible to retry the RENEW
  command with specified renewal period parameters.

  7xx: These codes are returned usually as a result of connection
  or timeout response with the registry.