This is the first release version of the Advanced Sample API "site in a box" php script.

We take no responsibility for the usage, integrity or security of the site, database, web server, or any other component whether
directly related or not.

This site serves as a basic template and sample.  It is intended for you to see how to make a site, and perhaps to modify
the code that is here to fit the security context of your server, or modify the script to sell/manage what ever products
in whatever way you desire.

Feel free to modify the script in any way shape or form.  Enom does not charge for this sample site, and as such we expect that
no reseller sell any version of this script - modified or in its original state - at any time under penalty.

If you have a modification, bug report, bug fix, etc  please report it to us.  You can also submit enhancements, etc. to us
using the support center.  Please attach all files you are including, as well as an explanation as to what it is, what its for,
what it does, etc.  We will then test it, and perhaps include it in a future release.  If we decide to use the changes/addition
then it becomes the property of enom from there after.

Some of the many features:

MySQL integration
On site database for customer login and domain management
Shopping cart
Paypal integration
Authorize.net integration
Worldpay integration
Sell domain names, transfers, renewals, pop packs, idprotect, 
     webhosting and more!

And a whole lot more!


The api script is designed to work on LINUX systems, and we can not be
responsible for the outcome of using it on a non Linux based system.  Nor
can we gaurantee compatibility or functionality of the script should
you choose to use it on windows or any other OS other then Linux/Unix.

When installing, make sure you edit the include/dbconfig.php file FIRST!  The installer will not work properly if you do not.

When finished, navigate to http://YOUR URL/install/ and read the installation instructions.  it will require you to create
a few directories, as well as set up a few cron jobs.  it will have all instructions there.

Thanks!